Add `process.entity_id` to attribute registry (#983)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/attributes-registry/process.md

| `process.command_args` | string[] | All the command arguments (including the command/executable itself) as received by the process. On Linux-based systems (and some other Unixoid systems supporting procfs), can be set according to the list of null-delimited strings extracted from `proc/[pid]/cmdline`. For libc-based executables, this would be the full argv vector passed to `main`. | `[cmd/otecol, --config=config.yaml]` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| `process.command_line` | string | The full command used to launch the process as a single string representing the full command. On Windows, can be set to the result of `GetCommandLineW`. Do not set this if you have to assemble it just for monitoring; use `process.command_args` instead. | `C:\cmd\otecol --config="my directory\config.yaml"` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| `process.creation.time` | string | The date and time the process was created, in ISO 8601 format. | `2023-11-21T09:25:34.853Z` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

> | `process.entity_id` | string | A unique identifier of the process. [1] | `9f26bf6c-2508-43e7-a048-ed1822d9ff52`; `903b0daafe95e8ed9c9c0c9070259c29` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

Reviewer: can we give it a more descriptive name? E.g. `process.global.id` ? Entity id seems to be very broad and does not seem to match the description

Author: I could rename this, but do you think we should make a namespace for one field? Or can you think of other things we might want to put in `global` in the future?

Reviewer 2: it is not global, it should be unique for given process but I don't think we can claim it is global

Also this field is used in 23 elastic integrations as well as internally. I wouldn't change it without sufficient solid grounds

> | `process.entity_id` | string | A unique identifier of the process. [1] | `9f26bf6c-2508-43e7-a048-ed1822d9ff52`; `903b0daafe95e8ed9c9c0c9070259c29` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `process.entity_id` | string | A globally unique identifier of the process. [1] | `9f26bf6c-2508-43e7-a048-ed1822d9ff52`; `903b0daafe95e8ed9c9c0c9070259c29` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
```

| `process.session_leader.pid` | int | The PID of the process's session leader. This is also the session ID (SID) of the process. | `14` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| `process.user.id` | int | The effective user ID (EUID) of the process. | `1001` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| `process.user.name` | string | The username of the effective user of the process. | `root` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| `process.vpid` | int | Virtual process identifier. [2] | `12` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

**[1]:** A globally unique identifier of the process. This can be any format
of unique indentifier.

> On Linux, where possible, it is RECOMMENDED that this is calculated

Reviewer: Other other limitations except Linux processes? 

Can we do eother "On Linux it is RECOMMENDED" or "Where possible it is RECOMMENDED"?

Author: Since all OSs should have PID and process start time, the only thing that's needed for this to work is a unique boot id which can be read by all collectors. AFAIK, only Linux has a boot UUID, but there could be other ways to generate one. Maybe some sort of IPC, where the first running collector on the system generates a boot UUID, and then the others read it. But that will start to get more complicated, and I think less likely that the recommended method is adopted.

I also don't know Windows or macos very well, if anyone knows of a way to get a boot UUID on those systems, I could add it to the note, and this should work for those too.

For now, I've changed this to "Where possible it is RECOMMENDED..."

> MD5 hash of the string `<pid>_<starttime>_<bootid>`.

Reviewer 3: Given that we plan to introduce an [attribute for the OS thread id](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/812), and that `process.creation.time` and `host.id` already exist, I wonder whether you think it would make sense to utilize those (existing and well-defined) attributes?

Using start time as defined here or `process.creation.time` would not make any difference, I also think using `host.id` instead of `boot.id` doesn't have any drawbacks.

The main benefit of using those existing values and concepts would be that they are well-defined across platforms, and re-using them would decrease complexity for implementors.

Author: Unfortunately, I don't think any of those attributes will really work here to create a globally unique ID.

In Linux ( and I think most other OSs) OS Thread ID will repeat like PID will; when the system reaches MAX_PID it will rollover and repeat, so it's not a unique identifier on the system.

`process.creation.time` is based on the wall clock, which could repeat, if the system clock were to drift forward, and then be reset backwards to correct it.

`host.id` could be duplicated, especially if data collector were getting data from multiple networks/user sites.

Those are all good suggestions though, I thought of a lot of the same, until I found their drawbacks.

I hope this is method is easy for implementers . I think most will already be tracking PID and start time, so the only thing they need to do is read the boot_id, which should just be a single read, once when the collector starts. I know reading it might not be possible in containers or because of other system restrictions, so that is a limitation of this method.

> MD5 hash of the string `<pid>_<starttime>_<bootid>`.

Reviewer 4: Is this the first time we define an attribute value as a hash? I couldn't find any other instance at this point but if we do have a similar definition elsewhere, we should consistently stick to one algorithm so that instrumentation libraries can use the same hashing library and don't have to resort to multiple different ones. If it's the first time we define one, we should be fine with sticking to MD5 also for all other such hash-derived values.

Reviewer 5: service.instance.id is kind of a hash. It's not MD5 though.

Personally I'd prefer NOT to specify which hash algorithm is used, instead requirements (e.g. <N% collision over X cardinality).  OR - we can agree that recommended algorithms can be updated as non-breaking changes - otherwise I think it risks change in the future.

Author: I think it's important to specify what hash algorithm to use, otherwise different collectors could use different algorithms, and the resulting values wouldn't match for the same process. The whole intention of this recommended method is to have the identical values generated for a process. The algorithm used doesn't matter as much. Maybe it should be something other than MD5, if we use only one, and it can be used for other things that could be more affected by collisions.

Is there a place we can specify that entity_id might not match between versions? If so, then I think we can say that changing the algorithm between versions is a non-breaking change. Since this recommended algorithm can't be used in all situations (or some implementors could choose not to use it), it won't be possible for anything to rely on the entity_id being identical between collectors.

Reviewer 4: > I think it's important to specify what hash algorithm to use, otherwise different collectors could use different algorithms, and the resulting values wouldn't match for the same process. The whole intention of this recommended method is to have the identical values generated for a process. The algorithm used doesn't matter as much. Maybe it should be something other than MD5, if we use only one, and it can be used for other things that could be more affected by collisions.

Makes sense.

What would you think of taking the tuple string directly instead of using a hash?

Since attribute value size can be of concern, we could consider using the last fragment of boot_id only, which would yield a string shorter than the MD5 hash would be. Not sure if the format is well-defined and portable, though.
man for [random(4)](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man4/random.4.html) only "defines" it by means of an example:

>        uuid and boot_id
>              These read-only files contain random strings like
>              6fd5a44b-35f4-4ad4-a9b9-6b9be13e1fe9.  The former is
>              generated afresh for each read, the latter was generated
>              once.

Reviewer 4: > Is there a place we can specify that entity_id might not match between versions? If so, then I think we can say that changing the algorithm between versions is a non-breaking change.

There isn't a syntax in YAML to define it like that but we could consider putting that in a note.
Your collectors might not run the same version but I'd hope we'd only change the hash algorithm (if we use one) once or twice in years, so it shouldn't be a large concern.

Reviewer 2: I'm in favor of adding a note to the field describing hashing algorithm
I wouldn't use tuple though. Strings are easier to compare and hash is also a very common thing to produce such ids.
Internally in one of security product we use for example  hash of instrumentation uid and process uid.

Author: > What would you think of taking the tuple string directly instead of using a hash?

Some Elastic products are actually currently using a tuple, but we'd like to move away from it. Since systems can generate a very large number of process events, there's value in trying to keep event logs as small as possible, and we haven't ever really had a use for the data within the entity_id tuple, so we think it's better to use a hash.

I think using a tuple with only partial uuid segments would increase the chances of collision, although I'm not sure by how much.

> MD5 hash of the string `<pid>_<starttime>_<bootid>`.

Author: thanks, I've changed all of these formatting and description changes

e.g.

| Key | Description | Example Value |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `pid` | PID | "1201" |

> | `starttime` | start time in seconds since boot | "3029" |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `starttime` | The number of seconds since the last boot | "3029" |
```

Author: I've change this to `The process start time in seconds since system boot`, just to make it clear that's what time it's referring to

> | `bootid` | boot ID, as read from `/proc/sys/kernel/random/boot_id` | "16b6f4a4-179e-4480-9561-0df471d8c6d4" |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `bootid` | The boot ID, as read from `/proc/sys/kernel/random/boot_id` | "16b6f4a4-179e-4480-9561-0df471d8c6d4" |
```
